---
title: CS-443 Machine Learning
description: "My notes from the CS-443 Machine Learning course given at EPFL, in the 2018 autumn semester (MA1)"
unlisted: true
---

* TOC
{:toc}

We'll always use subscript $n$ for data point, and $d$ for feature. $N$ is the data size and $D$ is the dimensionality.

## Linear regression
A linear regression is a model that assumes a linear relationship between inputs and the output.

### Simple linear regression

For a single input dimension ($D=1$), we can use a simple linear regression, which is given by:

$$
y_n \approx f(x_n) := w_0 + w_1 x_{n1}
$$

$w = (w_0, w_1)$ are the parameters of the model.

### Multiple linear regression

If our data has multiple input dimensions, we obtain multivariate linear regression:

$$
y_n \approx 
    f(\pmb{x}_n) :=w_0 + w_1x_{n1}+\dots+w_D x_{wD} 
    = w_0 + \pmb{x}_n^t \begin{bmatrix}
        w_1 \\
        \vdots \\
        w_D \\
    \end{bmatrix}
    = \tilde{\pmb{x}}_n ^T \tilde{\pmb{w}}
$$

> 👉🏼 If we wanted to be a little more strict, we should write $f_{\pmb{w}}(\pmb{x}_n)$, as the model of course also depends on the weights.

The tilde notation means that we have included the offset term $w_0$, also known as the **bias**:

$$
\tilde{\pmb{x}}_n=\begin{bmatrix}1 \\ x_{n1} \\ \vdots \\ x_{nD} \end{bmatrix} \in \mathbb{R}^{D+1}, 
\quad
\tilde{\pmb{w}} = \begin{bmatrix}w_0 \\ w_1 \\ \vdots \\ w_D\end{bmatrix} \in \mathbb{R^{D+1}}
$$

### The $D > N$ problem

If the number of parameters exceeds the number of data examples, we say that the task is *under-determined*. This can be solved by regularization, which we’ll get to more precisely later

## Cost functions

$\pmb{x}_n$ is the data, which we can easily understand where comes from. But how does one find a good $\pmb{w}$ from the data? 

A **cost function** (also called loss function) is used to learn parameters that explain the data well. It quantifies how well our model does by giving errors a score, quantifying penalties for errors. Our goal is to find weights that minimize the loss functions.

### Properties

Desirable properties of cost functions are:

- **Symmetry around 0**: that is, being off by a positive or negative amount is equivalent; what matters is the amplitude of the error, not the sign.
- **Robustness**: penalizes large errors at about the same rate as very large errors. This is a way to make sure that outliers don’t completely dominate our regression.

### Good cost functions

#### MSE

Probably the most commonly used cost function is Mean Square Error (MSE): 

$$
\text{MSE}(\pmb{w}) := \frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N \left(y_n - f(\pmb{x}_n)\right)^2
$$

MSE is symmetrical aroudn 0, but also tends to penalize outliers quite harshly (because it squares error): MSE is not robust. In practice, this is problematic, because outliers occur more often than we’d like to.

#### MAE

When outliers are present, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) tends to fare better:

$$
\text{MAE}(\pmb{w}) := \frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N \left| y_n - f(\pmb{x}_n)\right|
$$

Instead of squaring, we take the absolute value. This is more robust. Note that MAE isn’t differentiable at 0, but we’ll talk about that later.

There are other cost functions that are even more robust; these are available as additional reading, but is not exam material.

### Convexity

A function is **convex** iff a line joining two points never intersects with the function anywhere else. More strictly defined, a function $f(\pmb{u})$ with $\pmb{u}\in\chi$ is *convex* if, for any $\pmb{u}, \pmb{v} \in\chi$, and for any $0 \le\lambda\le 1$, we have:

$$
f(\lambda\pmb{u}+(1-\lambda)\pmb{v})\le\lambda f(\pmb{u}) +(1-\lambda)f(\pmb{v})
$$

A function is **strictly convex** if the above inequality is strict ($<$).

A stritly convex function has a unique global minimum $\pmb{w}^*$. For convex functions, every local minimum is a global minimum. This makes it a desirable property for loss functions, since it means that cost function optimization is guaranteed to find the global minimum.

Sums of convex functions are also convex. Therefore, MSE and MAE are convex.

## Optimization

### Learning / Estimation / Fitting

Given a cost function (or loss function) $\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w})$, we wish to find $\pmb{w}^*$ which minimizes the cost:

$$
\min_{\pmb W}{\mathcal{L}(\pmb w)}, \quad\text{ subject to } \pmb w \in \mathbb R^D
$$

This is what we call **learning**: learning is simply an optimization problem, and as such, we’ll use an optimization algorithm to solve it – that is, find a good $\pmb w$.

### Grid search

This is one of the simplest optimization algorithms, although far from being the most efficient one. It can be described as “try all the values”, a kind of brute-force algorithm; you can think of it as nested for-loops over the individual $w_i$ weights.

For instance, if our weights are $\pmb{w} = \begin{bmatrix}w_1 \\ w_2\end{bmatrix}$, then we can try, say 4 values for $w_1$, 4 values for $w_2$, for a total of 16 values of $\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w})$.

But obviously, complexity is exponential $\mathcal{O}(a^D)$ (where $a$ is the number of values to try), which is really bad, especially when we can have $D\approx$ millions of parameters. Additionally, grid search has no guarantees that it’ll find an optimum; it’ll just find the best value we tried.

If grid search sounds bad for optimization, that’s because it is. In practice, it is not used for optimization of parameters, but it *is* used to tune hyperparameters.

### Optimization landscapes

#### Local minimum

A vector $\pmb{w}^*$ is a *local minimum* of a function $\mathcal{L}$ (we’re interested in the minimum of cost functions $\mathcal{L}$, which we denote with $\pmb{w}^*$, as opposed to any other value $\pmb{w}$, but this obviously holds for any function) if $\exists \epsilon > 0$ such that

$$
\newcommand{\norm}[1]{\left\lVert#1\right\rVert}

\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w}^*) \le \mathcal{L(\pmb{w})}, \quad \forall\pmb w : \norm{\pmb{w} -\pmb{w}^*} < \epsilon
$$

In other words, the local minimum $\pmb{w}^*$ is better than all the neighbors in some non-zero radius.

#### Global minimum

The global minimum is defined by getting rid of the radius $\epsilon$ and comparing to all other values:

$$
\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w}^*) \le \mathcal{L(\pmb{w})}, \qquad \forall\pmb{w}\in\mathbb{R}^D
$$

#### Strict minimum

A minimum is said to be **strict** if the corresponding equality is strict for $\pmb{w} \ne \pmb{w}^*$, that is, there is only one minimum value.

### Smooth (differentiable) optimization

#### Gradient

A gradient at a given point is the slope of the tangent to the function at that point. It points to the direction of largest increase of the function. By following the gradient (in the opposite direction, because we’re searching for a minimum and not a maximum), we can find the minimum.

>  TODO insert images of MAE and MSE gradients

Gradient is defined by:

$$
\nabla \mathcal{L}(\pmb{w}) := \begin{bmatrix}
	\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w})}{\partial w_1} \\
	\vdots \\
	\frac{\partial\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w})}{\partial w_D} \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

This is a vector, i.e. $\nabla\mathcal{L}(\pmb{w})\in\mathbb R^D$. Each dimension $i$ of the vector indicates how fast the cost $\mathcal{L}$ changes depending on the weight $w_i$.

#### Gradient descent

Gradient descent is an iterative algorithm. We start from a candidate $w^{(t)}$, and iterate.

$$
\pmb{w}^{(t+1)}:=\pmb{w}^{(t)} - \gamma \nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}^{(t)}\right)
$$

As stated previously, we’re adding the negative gradient to find the minimum, hence the substraction.

$\gamma$ is known as the **step-size**, which is a small value (maybe 0.1). You don’t want to be too aggressive with it, or you might risk overshooting in your descent. In practice, the step-size that makes the learning as fast as possible is often found by trial and error 🤷🏼‍♂️.

As an example, we can define gradient descent for a 1-parameter model to minimize the MSE cost function $\mathcal{L}\left(w_0\right)=\frac{1}{2N}\sum_{n=1}^N{\left(y_n - w_0\right)^2}$

Note that we’re dividing by 2 on top of the regular MSE; it has no impact on finding the minimum, but when we compute the gradient, it conveniently cancels out the $\frac{1}{2}$.

The gradient is:

$$
\begin{align}
\nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right)
	& = \frac{\partial}{\partial w_0}\mathcal{L} \\
	& = \frac{1}{2N}\sum_{n=1}^N{-2(y_n - w_0)}  \\
	& = w_0 - \bar{y}
\end{align}
$$

And thus, our gradient descent is given by:

$$
\begin{align*}
w_0^{(t+1)}
	&:= w_0^{(t)} - \gamma\nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb w\right) \\
	& = w_0^{(t)} - \gamma(w_0^{(t)} - \bar{y}) \\
	& = (1-\gamma)w_0^{(t)} + \gamma\bar{y}, 
	\qquad\text{where } \bar{y}:=\sum_{n}{\frac{y_n}{N}}
\end{align*}
$$

This sequence is guaranteed to converge for $\pmb{w}^* = \bar{y}$ (so the solution to this exact problem can be extracted analytically from gradient descent). This would set the cost function to 0, which is the minimum.

The choice of $\gamma$ has an influence on the algorithm’s outcome:

- If we pick $\gamma=1$, we would get to the optimum in one step
- If we pick $\gamma < 1$, we would get a little closer in every step, eventually converging to $\bar{y}$
- If we pick $\gamma > 1$, we are going to overshoot $\bar{y}$. Slightly bigger than 1 (say, 1.5) would still converge; $\gamma=2$ would loop infinitely between two points; $\gamma > 2$ diverges.

#### Gradient descent for linear MSE

Our linear regression is given by a line $\pmb{y}$ that is a regression for some data $\pmb X$:

$$
\pmb{y}=\begin{bmatrix}
	y_1 \\ y_2 \\ \vdots \\ y_N
\end{bmatrix}, 
\quad
\pmb{X}=\begin{bmatrix}
x_{11} & x_{12} & \dots & x_{1D} \\
x_{21} & x_{22} & \dots & x_{2D} \\
\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
x_{N1} & x_{N2} & \dots & x_{ND} \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

Our model is:

$$
f_w(x)=\pmb{x}_n^T \pmb{w}
$$

We define the error vector by:

$$
\pmb{e}=\pmb{y} - \pmb{Xw}, 
\quad \text{ or } \quad 
\pmb{e}_n = \pmb{x}_n^T\pmb{w}
$$

The MSE can then be restated as follows:

$$
\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right)
	:= \frac{1}{2N}\sum_{n=1}^N{\left( y_n - \pmb{x}_n^T \pmb{w}\right)^2}
	=  \frac{1}{2N}\pmb{e}^T\pmb{e}
$$

And the gradient is, component-wise:

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial\pmb{w}_d}\mathcal{L}
	= -\frac{1}{2N}\sum_{n=1}^N {2(y_n - \pmb{x}_n^T \pmb{w}) \pmb{x}_{nd}}
	= -\frac{1}{N} (\pmb{X}_{:d})^T \pmb{e}
$$

We’re using column notation $\pmb{X}_{:d}$ to signify column $d$ of the matrix $X$.

And thus, all in all, our gradient is:

$$
\nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right) = -\frac{1}{N}\pmb{X}^T\pmb{e}
$$

To compute this expression, we must compute:

- The error $\pmb e$, which takes $2N\cdot D - 1$ floating point operations (flops) for the matrix-vector multiplication, and $N$ for the subtraction, for a total of $2N\cdot D + N - 1$, which is $\mathcal{O}(N\cdot D)$
- The gradient $\nabla\mathcal{L}$, which costs $2N\cdot D + D - 1$, which is $\mathcal{O}(N\cdot D)$.

In total, this process is $\mathcal{O}(N\cdot D)$ at every step. This is not too bad, it’s equivalent to reading the data once.

#### Stochastic gradient descent (SGD)

In ML, most cost functions are formulated as a sum of:

$$
\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right) = \frac{1}{N}\sum_{n=1}^N{\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w})}
$$

In practice, this can be expensive to compute, so the solution is to pick a random $n$ uniformly at random in $n\in\left[1, N\right]$ to be able to make the sum go away.

The stochastic gradient descent is thus:

$$
\pmb{w}^{(t+1)}:=\pmb{w}^{(t)} - \gamma \nabla\mathcal{L}_n\left({\pmb{w}^{(t)}}\right)
$$

Why is it allowed to pick just one $n$ instead of the full thing? We won’t give a full proof, but the intuition is that:

$$
\mathbb{E}\left[ \nabla\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w}) \right] 
	= \frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N{\nabla\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w})}
	= \nabla\left(\frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N{\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w})}\right)
	\equiv \nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right)
$$

The gradient of a single n is:

$$
\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w}) = \frac{1}{2} \left(y_n -\pmb{x}_n^T w\right)^2 \\
\nabla\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w}) = (-x_n^T) (y_n-\pmb{x}_n^T \pmb{w})
$$

Note that $x_n^T \in\mathbb{R}^D$, and $(y_n-\pmb{x}_n^T \pmb{w})\in\mathbb{R}$. Computational complexity for this is $\mathcal{O}(D)$. 

#### Mini-batch SGD

But perhaps just picking a **single** value is too extreme; there is an intermediate version in which we choose a subset $B\subseteq \left[N\right]$ instead of $|B|$ points, instead of a single point.

$$
g := \frac{1}{|B|}\sum_{n\in B}{\nabla\mathcal{L}_n(\pmb{w}^{(t)})} \\
w^{(t+1)} := w^{(t)} - \gamma\pmb{g}
$$

Note that if $|B| = N$ then we’re performing a full gradient descent.

The computation of $\pmb{g}$ can be parallelized easily over $|B|$ GPU threads, which is quite common in practice; $|B|$ is thus often dictated by the number of available threads.

Computational complexity is $\mathcal{O}(|B|\cdot D)$.

### Non-smooth (non-differentiable) optimization

We’ve defined convexity previously, but we can also use the following alternative characterization of convexity:

$$
\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb u\right) \ge \mathcal{L}\left(\pmb w\right) + \nabla \mathcal{L}\left(\pmb w\right)^T(\pmb{u} - \pmb{w}) \quad \forall \pmb{u}, \pmb{w}
\iff \mathcal{L} \text{ convex}
$$

Meaning that the function must always lie above its linearization (which is the first-order Taylor expansion) to be convex.

#### Subgradients

A vector $\pmb{g}\in\mathbb{R}^D$ such that:

$$
\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb u\right) \ge \mathcal{L}\left(\pmb w\right) + \pmb{g}^T(\pmb u - \pmb w) \quad \forall \pmb{u}, \pmb{w}
$$

is called a **subgradient** to the function $\mathcal{L}$ at $\pmb w$. The subgradient forms a line that is always below the curve, somewhat like the gradient of a convex function.

This definition is valid even for an arbitrary $\mathcal{L}$ that may not be differentiable, and not even necessarily convex.

If the function $\mathcal{L}$ is differentiable at $\pmb w$, then the *only subgradient* at $w$ is $\pmb{g} = \nabla\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right)$.

#### Subgradient descent

This is exactly like gradient descent, except for the fact that we use the *subgradient* $\pmb{g}$ at the current iterate $\pmb{w}^{(t)}$ instead of the *gradient*:

$$
w^{(t+1)} := w^{(t)} - \gamma\pmb{g}
$$

For instance, MAE is not differentiable at 0, so we must use the subgradient.

$$
\text{Let }h: \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}, \quad h(e) := |e| \\
\text{At } e, \text{the subgradient }
g \in \partial h = \begin{cases}
-1 & \text{if } e < 0 \\
[-1, 1] & \text{if } e = 0 \\
1 & \text{if } e > 0 \\
\end{cases}
$$

Here, $\partial h$ is somewhat confusing notation for the set of all possible subgradients at our position.

For linear regressions, the (sub)gradient is easy to compute using the *chain rule*.

Let $h$ be non-differentiable, $q$ differentiable, and $\mathcal{L}\left(\pmb{w}\right) = h(q(w))$. The chain rule tells us that, at $\pmb w$, our subgradient is:

$$
g \in \partial h(q(\pmb{w})) \cdot \nabla q(\pmb{w})
$$

#### Stochastic subgradient descent

This is still commonly abbreviated SGD.

It’s exactly the same, except that $\pmb g$ is a subgradient to the randomly selected $\mathcal{L}_n$ at the current iterate $\pmb{w}^{(t)}$.



### Comparison

|                             | Smooth                                                       | Non-smooth                                                   |
| --------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Full gradient descent       | Gradient of $\mathcal{L}$ <br />Complexity is $\mathcal{O}(N\cdot D)$ | Subgradient of $\mathcal{L}$<br />Complexity is $\mathcal{O}(N\cdot D)$ |
| Stochastic gradient descent | Gradient of $\mathcal{L}_n$                                | Subgradient of $\mathcal{L}_n$                             |



### Constrained optimization

Sometimes, optimization problems come posed with an additional constraint.

#### Convex sets

We’ve seen convexity for functions, but we can also define it for sets. A set $\mathcal{C}$ is convex iff the line segment between any two points of $\mathcal{C}$ lies in $\mathcal{C}$. That is, $\forall \pmb{u}, \pmb{v} \in \mathcal{C}, \quad \forall 0 \le \theta \le 1$, we have:

$$
\theta \pmb{u} + (1 - \theta)\pmb{v} \in \mathcal{C}
$$

A couple of properties of convex sets:

- Intersection of convex sets is also convex.
- Projections onto convex sets are **unique** (and often efficient to compute).



#### Projected gradient descent

